By the four dharmas, the works of Māras are overcome. What are the four?To with, six perfections (ṣaṭpāramitā) without fo
rgetting the thought of awakening (bodhicittāsaṃpramoṣa);carefulness established in faithful effort (śraddhāvīryasthitāp
ramāda);bringing living beings to maturity (satvaparipācana), based on skill in means (upāyakauśala);obtaining the true 
dharma (saddharmaparigraha), based on the profound guiding principle of dharma (gambhīradharmanaya).Son of good family, 
the bodhisatva, applying himself to such dharmas, transcends the way of the four Māras (caturmārapathasamatikrāntata) an
d vanquishes all Māras and adversaries (sarvamārapratyarthika).

32. SatvopajīvyaHow then, son of good family, the bodhisatva, having accumulated immeasurable merits (aprameyapuṇyopacaya
), nourishes all living beings (satvopajīvya)?.Son of good family, the bodhisatva practices friendliness (matrī) to all 
living beings;he practices compassion (karuṇā) to all creatures;he is not attached to anything in particular in his medi
tations (dhyāneṣu atanmayavihāritā);he gives away all his possessions to beggars (yācanakeṣu sarvasvaparityāgatā);his pl
easure is imperishable (akṣayabhoga) through his merits (puṇya);he is always committed to his intension (āśaya) by the p
urity of morality (śīlapariśuddhi);his thoughts are like an earth (pṛthivīsama) since there is no high or low (natonnata
) in his mind;he is free from thoughts by pure morality (śīlapariśuddhi);his thought is liberated (cittamukta) and the g
ate is free from hinderance (mukhānāvṛta) by accomplishing all sacrifices (sarvayajñapratipatti);he has perfected memory
and eloquence (dhāraṇīpratibhānasaṃpanna) by investigating the dharma (dharmapravicaya);he depends on the knowledge of 
supernatural powers (abhijñājñānāśrita) by going to immeasurable Buddha-fields (aprameyabuddhakṣetragamana);[he thinks:]
‘Just as the four main elements (cāturmahābhautika) in the external world nourish all living beings (satvaupajīvya), ma
y the four main elements belonging to me nourish all living beings!May there be in me no root of good connecting with th
e efficiency in knowledge of the dharma that does not support all living beings (mā bhūt tan mama kuśalamūlaṃ dharmajñān
akauśalyam vā yan na sarvvasatvopajīvyaṃ syād)! Thus the roots of good will be transformed by me.’Quotation from ŚikṣMS 
22b3; B 33,11-12; ŚikṣTib(D) 24b1; ŚikṣChi(T.1636) 82b5-7.ŚikṣMS: āryagaganagañjasūtre ’py āha mā bhūt tan mama kuśalamū
laṃ dharmajñānakauśalyam vā yan na sarvvasatvopajīvyaṃ syād iti |ŚikṣTib: ’phags pa nam mkha’ mdzod kyi mdo las kyaṅ | b
dag gi dge ba’i rtsa ba’am chos la mkhas pa gaṅ yin pa de sems can thams cad kyi ñe bar ’tsho bar mi ’gyur bar ma gyur c
ig ces gsuṅs so ||ŚikṣChi: Śikṣ又虚空藏經云。我所積集善根法智善巧。無不與諸衆生而爲依住。In that way, the bodhisatva, having accumulated immeasurable
merits, nourishes all living beings.

33. BuddhakāryaHow then, son of good family, does the bodhisatva appear to many beings (satveṣu pratyupasthitaḥ) performi
ng the deeds of a Buddha (buddhakārya) even when the Buddhas do not appear?Son of good family, the bodhisatva has perfec
ted the purification of the ten powers (daśabalapariśodhananiryāta) by knowing what is proper and what is improper (sthā
nāsthānajñāna);he has perfected the purification of the four fearlessness (caturvaiśāradyapariśodhananiryāta) by knowing
the cessation of impurities (āsravakṣayajñāna);he has perfected the purification of the eighteen special qualities of t
he Tathāgata (aṣṭādaśāveṇikabuddhadharmapariśodhananiryāta) by knowing the unattached knowledge of the three times (trya
dhvāsaṅgajñānajñāna);.he has perfected the purification of five kinds of sight (pañcacakṣuḥpariśodhananiryāta) by obtain
ing the light of the sight of the Buddha (buddhacakṣurālokalabdha);he has perfected the purification of all supernormal 
knowledges (sarvābhijñāpariśodhananiryāta) by the attainment of going to the seat of awakening (bodhimaṇḍagamanalabdha);
he has perfected fulfilling all good qualities (sarvakuśaladharmaparipūraṇaniryāta) by completely cutting off the habitu
al patterns of vices (kleśavāsanā);he has perfected the purification of the ornaments of body, speech, thought, the ausp
icious marks and signs (kāyavākcittalakṣaṇānuvyañjanālaṃkārapariśodhananiryāta) by accumulating all collections of merit
s (sarvapuṇyasaṃbhāropacaya);he has perfected the purification of the ten stages (daśabhūmipariśodhananiryāta) by obtain
ing the stage of consecration (abhiṣeka);he has perfected the purification of all qualities of the Buddha (sarvabuddhadh
armapariśodhananiryāta) by accumulating the collection of knowledges (jñānasaṃbhāropacaya);In that way, son of good fami
ly, the bodhisatva appears to many beings, performing the deeds of the Buddha even when the Buddhas do not appear.

34. SāgaramudrāsamādhiHow then, son of good family, does the bodhisatva become unattached to all thoughts and deeds of li
ving beings (sarvasatvacittacaritāsakta) when he obtains the ocean seal samādhi (sāgaramudrāsamādhipratilabdha)?.Son of 
good family, as many as features of living beings appear in the Jambudvipa World, the seal which is like all of them ref
lects in the great ocean, thus it is called the great ocean (māhasāgara).In the same way, as many as there are the appea
rance of thoughts (cittāvabhāsa), the appearance of forms (rūpāvabhāsa), or the appearance of sounds (śabdāvabhāsa), all
those reflect in a single appearance (avabhāsa) of the bodhisatva who maintains the ocean seal samādhi, thus it is call
ed the ocean seal samādhi (sāgaramudrāsamādhi).Just as the great ocean is of a single taste (ekarasa), so the dharma of 
the bodhisatva is also of a single taste since he knows the taste of liberation (vimukirasa).Just as [the tide of] the g
reat ocean is punctual, so the bodhisatva is never late for the seat of awakening (bodhimaṇḍa) by investigating when is 
the right time and wrong time.Just as the great ocean decomposes a rotting corpse (mahāsāgaro mṛtakuṇapena sārdhaṃ saṃva
santi), so the bodhisatva breaks down any habitual pattern of vices (sarvakleśavāsanā) or any thought of disciples and i
solated buddhas (sarvaśrāvakapratyekabuddhacitta).Just as, no matter how much water in the great ocean is consumed, ther
e is no increase or decrease, just so, no matter how much the dharma is consumed, the sphere of the dharma (dharmadhātu)
of the bodhisatva is not increased or decreased.Just as the width of the great ocean is immeasurable, so the insight (p
rajñā) of the bodhisatva is immeasurable.Just as the depth of the great ocean is hard to fathom (duravagāha), so the pro
foundness of the bodhisatva is hard for disciples and isolated buddhas to understand.Just as the great ocean is the plac
e of immeasurable living beings, so the maturing of immeasurable living beings (satvaparipācana) depends on the bodhisat
va.This is the entrance of the ocean seal samādhi (sāgaramudrāsamādhipraveśa), and, son of good family, the bodhisatva w
ho enters into the way is not attached to the thoughts or deeds of any living being (sarvasatvacittacaritāsakta).

35. SaṅgasamatikramaHow then, son of good family, does the bodhisatva transcend all attachments (sarvasaṅgasamatikrama)?W
hat is called ‘attachment’ means the manifestation of viewpoints (dṛṣṭiparyutthāna) on the dharmas.The bodhisatva transc
ends all attachments since he is free from any manifestation of viewpoints (dṛṣṭiparyutthāna).Just as the wind (vāyu) is
not attached to the vault of the sky, so the bodhisatva who is endowed with the wind-like thought is not attached to an
y living being.

36. ĀlokalabdhaThen, those good men know the way of good conduct (cāritra) and dignified manner (ācāra). Here, the dignif
ied manner means mindfulness (smṛti) and the good conduct means non-distraction (avikṣepa).They obtain the light (āloka)
being free from darkness (andhakāra). Here, what is called the darkness is the ignorance (ajñāna) of dharmas, and what 
is called the light is the unhindered knowledge (apratihatajñāna) of dharmas, thus those are called being free from dark
ness and obtaining the light.

37. SarvajñajñānaThose good men obtain the self-originated knowledge (svayaṃbhujñāna), not being dependent on the knowled
ge of others (jñānāparapraṇeya)..Why is that? This is because they are dependent on the self-originated knowledge (svaya
ṃbhujñāna), and do not seek the knowledge of other beings (parasatvajñāna).When the bodhisatva does not depend on others
, obtains the self-originated knowledge (svayaṃbhujñāna), and teaches the knowledge of determining the dharma (dharmavin
iścayajñānanirdeśa), then he immediately attains the knowledge of omniscience (sarvajñajñāna).

Verses 87-118Then on that occasion the Lord uttered these verses (atha khalu bhagavāṃs tasyāṃ velāyāṃ imā gāthā abhāṣata)
:87 The wise one whose thought is detached from any viewpoint (dṛṣti), who accumulates merits (puṇya), who is without th
e appearance of distinguishing marks (nimittāvyutthāna), and who transforms everything into awakening, becomes imperisha
ble.

88 Having abandoned pride and conceit (mānātimāna), seeking for the accumulation of knowledge (jñānasaṃbhāra), the wise o
ne, having the nature of infinite space (anantagaganasvabhāva), fulfils the knowledge of omniscience (sarvajñajñānaṃ par
ipūrayati).

89 Son of the Victorious One (jinaputra), the recollection of the Buddha (buddhānusmṛti) is without the nature of form or
essential character (rūpalakṣaṇadharmatā). Where there is no moving of thought or mind (cittamanas), there is the recol
lection of the Buddha.

90 The dharma which is free from desire (rāga), essentially transcendent, always peaceful and calm, the absence of distin
guishing marks (animitta), and is free from any objective support (sarvālambana) is the recollection of the dharma (dhar
mānusmṛti).

91 The holy Saṃgha which is unconditioned (anabhisaṃskṛta), empty (śūnyatā), without distinguishing marks (animitta), lib
erated from wishing (praṇidhāna) and in which there is no thinking nor any activity of recollection is the recollection 
of the Saṇgha (saṃghānusmṛti).

92 The renunciation which abandons all parts of personality (sarvaskandha), gives away any object of vices (sarvakleśavas
tu), purified from thought-constructions and discriminations (kalpavikalpa) without arrogance is the recollection of ren
unciation (tyāgānusmṛti).

93 The morality which is unsullied (anāsrava), unconditioned (asaṃskṛta), without any activity of body, speech or mind (k
āyavākcitta), without any origination, and not dependent on the triple states of existence (tribhava) is the recollectio
n of morality (śīlānusmṛti).

94 God is pure and free from impurity (mala) or vices (kleśa), dwells in the Tuṣita Heaven (tuṣitabhavanastha), and obtai
ns the stage of consecration (abhiṣeka). Recollecting such pure beings, one thinks “I will also become like him, the Lor
d, soon.”

95 Grasping the true dharma (saddharma) of the Tathāgata is not to grasp any object of vices (sarvekleśavastu) and to be 
liberated from both truth or untruth (dharmādharma), that is the grasping the true dharma of the Victorious One (Jina).

96 The Victorious One (jina) attains the essential character of awakening (bodhilakṣaṇa), and grasps the essential charac
ter of the dharma (dharmalakṣaṇa). That by which he knows the limit of reality (bhūtakoṭi) without impurities is the obt
aining all qualities of the Buddha (buddhadharma).

97 If you are pure yourself, living beings (satva) are also pure. The one who penetrates the wisdom that all dharmas are 
pure, his mind is basically pure (prakṛtiprabhāsvara), and he brings living beings to maturity in order for them to get 
rid of [the misunderstanding of an eternal] life principle (satva).

98 Not destroying (avināśayati) the sphere of living beings (satvadhātu), not seeing decreasing or increasing, teaching t
he abandonment of erroneous viewpoint, thus he purifies many beings (bahusatva).

99 He who teaches the sphere of this world, also teaches the sphere of the Buddha (buddhaviṣaya); the sphere of the Buddh
a is just like open space (gagana), in this way he understands the sphere of this world.

100 When you see all sounds and syllables as an echo (pratiśrutkā), hearing disappears. This kind of insight (prajñā) is 
to obtain the memory (dhāraṇī).

101 While remembering, reciting, and explaining various teachings of the dharma, if you do not have any conception of sel
f, living beings or even the dharma, then that is being established in memory (dhāraṇī).

102 Keeping the words of the Victorious One (jina), satisfying all living beings by eloquent speech (subhāṣita), never be
ing separated from concentration (samādhi) with pure recollection, that is the qualities of the certainty of the memory 
(dhāraṇīniyāmaguṇa).

103 Not accumulating the dharma, not moving or wavering in the dharma, just as the nāgas bring down the incessant rain, s
o you should pour down the rain of the dharma (dharmavarṣa).

104 Eloquence (pratibhāna) which is the sources of good qualities (guṇākara) is without hindrance or interruption and is 
explaining thousand koṭis of sūtras (sūtrasahasrakoṭi) without discrimination of living beings by their abilities (satve
ndriya).

105 By the power of the Buddha (buddhānubhāva), for the thousands koṭis of aeons, the dharma has been taught uninterrupte
dly. Living beings have been satisfied according to their wishes because the qualities of the Buddha have been establish
ed by the principle of eloquence (pratibhāna).

106 “All these dharmas are just as empty space,” knowing the aspects of all dharmas like this, he does not hold any conce
pt of living beings, life principle, or person, this is to transcend the Māra inherent in the parts of personality (skan
dhamāra).

107 Since all living beings are originally extinguished (prakṛtinirvṛta), they are never born. His patience shining like 
this is not carelessness (apramāda) about this teaching.

108 Seeing all parts of personality (skandha) as an illusion (māyā), knowing all spheres as the sphere of the dharma (dha
rmadhātu), considering the six sense organs (ṣaḍindriya) as an empty town (śūnyagrāma), this is to transcend the Māra in
herent in the parts of personality (skandhamāra).

109 Being aware of that vices (kleśa) are just like a mass of clouds (abhrakūṭa), examining the dharma correctly, and not
making any thought-construction or fiction (akalpāvikalpa), this is to transcend the Māra inherent in vices (kleśamāra)
.

110 He who knows that there is no arising of birth, death, or transmigration, and there is no coming or going of the dhar
mas, he is not subject to the Māra of death (mṛtyumāra).

111 He who has no agitated or conceited thinking, who nurtures no idea of awakening (bodhisaṃjñā) even while abiding in a
wakening, and who practices compassion (karuṇā) even though he nurtures no idea of a self or living beings, he conquers 
the Māra and his forces (sabala).

112 Seeing both consciousness and knowledge (vijñānajñāna) equally, not being established in the conditioned nor the unco
nditioned, and regarding the thoughts of migrating beings (jagaccitta) as an illusion (māyā), that is the heroic uncrush
ability (anavamṛdya).

113 Not being attached to this side nor that side, sailing the vessel of the dharma (dharmanau), and liberating living be
ings without any idea of them, that is called the sameness of the bodhisatva.

114 He who knows that the three realms are just like a wilderness (kāntāra) which is void and unchangeable, but who still
liberates living beings according to regular order (anupūrva), he is a caravan leader (sārthavāha) who guides the way t
o ambrosia (amṛta).

115 The learned who is skilled in the proper way and the improper way, who knows that the dharmas are empty from the very
beginning, but who still leads [living beings] to liberation (nirvāṇa) by logical way, he is the bodhisatva called ‘a l
eader (nāyaka).’

116 He who knows that the train of thoughts (cittasaṃtāna) always changes into somethings else, the [present] thought is 
not connected to the [past or future] thoughts, and thus the train of thoughts is migrating, he is the bodhisatva called
‘a principle (pariṇāyaka).’

117 Just as the nature of open space (gaganasvabhāva) or the moon reflected in water (udakacandra), all dharmas are pure 
and impeccable. Not being contaminated by any vice (kleśa), pure beings (pariśuddhasatva) are irreproachable (anindita).

118 He who, by a single dharma, knows that all dharmas are ungraspable, void, unreal, and impermanent just like an illusi
on or a mirage, he will soon reach the place of awakening.(ekena dharmeṇa tu sarvadharmān anugacchate māyamarīcisādṛśān 
||agrāhyatucchān alikān aśāśvatān so bodhimāṇḍaṃ na cireṇa gaccati ||)Quotation from Pras p.128,6-9; PrasTib 43a7.Pras: 
āryagaganagañjasamādhisūtre ’pi ekena dharmeṇa tu sarvadharmān anugacchate māyamarīcisādṛśān | agrāhyatucchān alikān aśā
śvatān so bodhimāṇḍaṃ na cireṇa gaccati || iti || PrasTib: ’phags pa nam mkha’ mdzod kyi tiṅ ṅe ’dzin gyi mdo las kyaṅ |
| chos gcig gis ni chos rnams thams cad sgyu ma daṅ || smig rgyu daṅ ’dra gzuṅ byar med ciṅ gsog daṅ ni || brdzun zhiṅ t
her zug min par rjes su rtogs gyur pa || de ni ring por mi thogs byaṅ chub sñing por ’gro ||

VyākaraṇaWhen this decisive teaching was declared, seventy-two millions of gods, humans, asuras, kiṃnaras, mahoragas, and
other beings produced the thought of incomparable complete awakening (iha dharmaniścaye nirdiśyamāne dvisaptatidevamānu
ṣāsurakinnaramahoragaprāṇiniyutānām anuttarāyāṃ samyaksaṃbodhau cittāny utpāditāni);thirty-two thousand bodhisatvas atta
ined the tolerance that all things are unborn (dvātriṃśatīnāṃ ca bodhisatvasahasrāṇām anutpattikadharmakṣāntiḥ pratilabd
hā);this world system of three thousandfold worlds was shaken in its six ways (trisāhasramahāsāhasralokadhātuś ca ṣaḍvik
āraḥ prakampito abhūt);and the world was illuminated by a grand lustre (avabhāsa).A hundred thousand gods, having let fa
ll the rain of flowers (puṣpavarṣa) and played the celestial cymbals (tūrya), uttered a joyous utterance (udānam udānaya
ti): “Living beings who, having heard this teaching, believe it, embrace it, practice it, and proceed to the realm of th
e Buddha (buddhaviṣaya).All the Buddha-fields (buddhakṣetra), where the Awakened Lords appear, are adorned with ornament
s and respected by the wise.Why is that? When the Buddhas appear, such dharma will be taught, and the good men (satpurṣa
) endowed with inconceivable qualities (acintyadharma) will see it.”Then the bodhisatva, the great being Gaganagañja, ha
ving heard the Buddha’s prediction (vyākaraṇa), being delighted, offered to the body of the Buddha with a net of pearls 
(muktājāla) having an immaculate and pure radiance (vimalaviśuddhaprabha) with the value of pearls filling the three tho
usandfold world-system, and then he addressed himself to the Lord:“The knowledge of the Awakened Lords is free from any 
attachment or obstruction; his teaching is without interruption; and the Tathāgata sees the thoughts of all living being
s and is skilled in knowing the superior or inferior abilities of them (indriyavarāvarajñāna).Since the Lord teaches suc
h guiding principle of the dharma (dharmanaya), all congregations are satisfied,the great vehicle (mahāyāna) is praised,
and the bodhisatvas, having been assembled from the worlds of ten directions (daśadiglokadhātu), were praised with this 
great light of the dharma.Since the Lord Tathāgata teaches the entrance into the dharma (dharmamukha) to us, based on th
e entrance into the source of the dharma, we will teach the immeasurable entrance into the dharma.

V. Miracle

PuṣpavarṣaGaganagañjaparipṛcchā, volume 4Then the bodhisatva, the great being named Āśupratibhāna joined this assembly, w
as seated with them, and said this to the bodhisatva Gaganagañja (atha khalu āśupratibhāno nāma bodhisatvo mahāsatvo tat
raiva pariṣadi sannipatito ’bhūt sanniṣaṇṇo gaganagañjaṃ bodhisatvaṃ etad avocat):.“Son of good family, if your name is 
Gaganagañja, is this open space (gagana) your treasury (gañja)?”Gaganagañja said: “So it is, son of good family, the ope
n space is my treasury (gagano mama gañjaḥ).”Āśupratibhāna said: “Son of good family, let us see the distinction of open
space and treasury (gaganagañjaviśeṣa).Then the Lord said this to the bodhisatva, the great being Gaganagañja (atha kha
lu bhagavān gaganagañjaṃ bodhisatvam mahāsatvam idam avocat):“Son of good family, let us see the distinction of open spa
ce and treasury.”Then the bodhisatva Gaganagañja said this to the bodhisatva Āśupratibhāna:“Whatever you want, son of go
od family, I will pour it down from open space as a rain.”Then the bodhisatva Āśupratibhāna made a wish:“I have seen a l
otus flower called ‘Sarvaprabhāvavairocana’ in the Padmavyūha universe of the Tathāgata Śrīratnotpala, that would be one
krośa wide,consisting of hundred koṭis of young and tender petals,is pleasant to touch like soft cloth (kācilindika),ha
s a fragrance (gandha) which filled the Buddha-fields (buddhakṣetra),and has many hundred thousand colors (varṇa).Thus w
hen the bodhisatvas see the lotus flower, they are in rapture and unable to take their eyes off it.By seeing the lotus f
lower and by smelling its fragrance, the bodhisatvas attain concentration (samādhi).Please pour down the rain of such lo
tus flowers on us.”Immediately after the bodhisatva Āśupratibhāna made a wish thus, by the magical presence of the bodhi
satva Gaganagañja (gaganagañjādhiṣṭhāna), the rain of such lotus flowers began to pour down from the vault of the sky (g
aganatala).Then, by smelling the lotus flowers, the whole assembly entered into the concentration called Prītyāhāra.Havi
ng emerged from the concentration, the whole assembly bowed to the bodhisatva Āśupratibhāna, and said:“The magical prese
nce of the good man (satpurṣādhiṣṭhāna) and the power of insight (prajñābala) are good, these are good.May all living be
ings attain magical presence such as this (sarvasatvā īdṛśasya adhiṣṭhānasya lābhino bhavantu)!”

RatnavarṣaThen the bodhisatva Ratnavyūha joined this assembly (atha khalu ratnavyūho nāma bodhisatvo sannipatito ’bhūt), 
was seated with them, and said this to the bodhisatva Gaganagañja:“Please, son of good family, pour down a rain of gold 
dust.”Immediately after the bodhisatva Ratnavyūha said thus, the rain of gold dust poured down from the sky.Then the bod
hisatva Ratnavyūha said to the bodhisatva Gaganagañja:“Son of good family, please pour down rain of all kinds of jewels 
from the sky.”Immediately after his words, the great rain of immeasurable, incalculable amount of jewels, equal to Mount
Sumeru in size, with various kinds of names and colors, poured down from ten directions.To wit, gold (suvarṇa), silver 
(rajata), crystal (sphaṭika), lapis lazuli (vaiḍūrya), emerald (aśmagarbha), ruby (lohitamuktikā), white coral (musāraga
lva), Śrīgarbha gem, stainless jewel, red coral gem, moonstone (candraprabhā), sunstone (sūryakānta), illuminating gem, 
brightening gem, Jambū-light gem, fire-light gem, conch shell (śaṅkha), crystal (śilā), red coral (pravāla), sapphire (i
ndranīla), Guṇākara gem, calm light gem, water-light gem, water-like gem, transparent gem, earthy light gem, indestructi
ble gem, blinding gem, śakra-holding gem, victor’s gem, the great victor’s gem, blazing light gem, the victor’s essence 
of glory gem, adamantine gem, worldly light gem, Jyotīrasa gem, shining gem, Ardhacandra gem, Jambū-water-light gem, Jam
būdvīpa-light gem, thousand lights gem, shooting star gem, burning light gem, … and nameless gems; the rain of these jew
els poured down, and it was not easy to enumerate all the names of precious jewels even for an aeon.

ĀhāracīvaravarṣaThen the bodhisatva named Kālarāja addressed himself to the bodhisatva Gaganagañja:“In this Saha universe
(sahālokadhātu), son of good family, there are living beings suffering from poverty (daridra), lacking food or drink (a
nannapāna), and wearing ragged clothes; there are hungry ghosts (preta) tormented by hunger and thirst (kṣutpipāsā), cov
ering themselves with their hairs, and subsisting on such as spittle, mucus, blood, and pus (kheṭasiṃhāṇarudhirapūya). I
n order to protect these living beings, please pour down the rain of food, drink, and clothing!”Immediately after that, 
by the magical presence of the bodhisatva Gaganagañja, the rain of all kinds of delicious hard foods, soft foods (khādan
īyabhojanīya), and soups poured down;the rain of all kinds of tasty beverages poured down to the depth of a chariot’s ax
le (akṣamātrābhir dhārābhiḥ);the rain of many hundred thousand colors of clothes, which are pleasant to touch like the t
hin and soft cloth (kācilindika), poured down.Then, in this world system of three thousandfold worlds (trisāhasramahāsāh
asralokadhātu), all the wretched and poor (sarvakṛpaṇadaridra), and all hungry ghosts (sarvapreta) were satisfied.

AmṛtavarṣaThen the bodhisatva Vaidyarāja addressed himself to the bodhisatva Gaganagañja:“Son of good family, there are p
atients (vyādhita) suffering from many diseases without nurse. For the sake of them, please pour down the rain of great 
medicine by which all the sick get free from sickness!”Immediately after that, the rain of ambrosia (amṛtavarṣa) poured 
down from the open space (āntarīkṣa), and all the sick were free from all diseases.

PāramitāvarṣaThen the bodhisatva Apāyajaha addressed himself to the bodhisatva Gaganagañja:“Son of good family, please pa
cify three evil existences (tryapāya).”Immediately after that, a bright light shone from the open space (āntarīkṣa), and
the inhabitants of hell (naraka), animals (tairyagyonika), and the inhabitants of Yāma’s world (yamalaukika), all those
who were touched by the light were filled with happiness (sukha), and so all beings in the three evil existences were p
acified.Then, the rain of gifts, such as flowers (puṣpa), garlands (mālā), incenses (gandha), unguents (upalepana), arom
atic powers (cūrṇa), religious robes (cīvara), parasols (chattra), banners (dhvaja), pennons (patākā), five kinds of mus
ical instruments (vādita), songs, male servants (dāsa), female servants (dāsī), wives (bhāryā), boys (dāraka), girls (ka
nyā), female attendants (dāra), horses (aśva), elephants (hasti), chariots (ratha), foot-soldiers (patti), vehicles (vāh
a), houses (gṛha), villages (sagrāma), cities (nagara), towns (nigama), provinces (janapada), kingdoms (rāṣṭra), capital
s (rājadhāni), gardens (udyāna), pavilions (kūṭāgāra), palaces (prāsāda), portals (toraṇa), windows (gavākṣa), half-moon
shaped decorations on building (ardhacandra), thrones (mañca), palanquin (śivika), and chariots drawn by four cattle, s
ixteen cattle, and a thousand of good horses (aśvājāneya), poured down from the open space.Thus the bodhisatva Gaganagañ
ja sustained by the magical presence said to the whole congregation of bodhisatvas:“Sons of good family, having received
all these riches, give them all away, and fulfill the perfection of generosity (dānapāramitā)!”Then the bodhisatva name
d Śīlālaṃkāra said this to the bodhisatva Gaganagañja:“Son of good family, if the rain of the perfection of generosity (
dānapāramitā) poured down by your magical power, why do you not pour down the rain of the perfection of morality (śīlapā
ramitā)?”Immediately after his words, the buddhas and bodhisatvas in ten directions praised the adornments of the virtue
s of morality (śīlaguṇālaṃkāra), and the voice of praising the virtues of morality, as many expressions as there are, re
sonated in the open space (āntarīkṣa).In the same way, the voices of [praising] the virtues of tolerance, vigour, medita
tion, and insight (kṣāntivīryadhyānaprajñā) [resonated in the open space.] As long as the buddhas and bodhisatvas in ten
directions taught a hundred thousand ways into the dharma (dharmamukha) by means of syllables, explanations, and agreed
terms (akṣaraniruktisaṃketa), all those voices of the dharma, which never increase or decrease and do not enter into an
y difference, resonated in the open space endlessly.By the sound of the dharma, all living beings in this world system o
f three thousandfold worlds (trisāhasramahāsāhasralokadhātu) obtained this understanding,and thus immeasurable and incal
culable living beings became matured in the three vehicles (triyāna).

Dharmavarṣa no dharnavarṣa sectionThen the bodhisatva named Samantāloka thought like this:Does this magical arrangement (
vyūha) of the bodhisatva Gaganagañja exist only in this world, or in other world-spheres as well?The bodhisatva Gaganaga
ñja, knowing telepathically the thought of the bodhisatva Samatāloka, said to him (atha gaganagañjo bodhisatvo bodhisatv
asya samatālokasya cetasā cetaḥparivitarkam ājñāya bodhisatvaṃ samatālokam etad avocat):“Son of good family, if you gain
the divine sight (divyacakṣur) which is completely clear and pure, son of good family, you can look at whatever can be 
seen in the world-spheres of ten directions (daśadiglokadhātu).”Then when the bodhisatva Samantāloka examined the world-
spheres of ten directions by the divine sight, in immeasurable and incalculable Buddha-fields of the ten directions, jus
t as the rain of all kinds of jewels poured down and all voices of the dharma resounded in this Sahā universe, just so i
n those Buddha-fields he saw that such phenomena occurred without increasing or decreasing, and without entering into an
y difference.Then the bodhisatva Samantāloka, having been astonished (āścaryaprāpta), uttered a joyous utterance (udānam
udānayati): “The accomplishment of the magical presence (adhiṣṭhāna) of the bodhisatva Gaganagañja’s vow (praṇidhāna) i
s inconceivable (acintya).O Good man (satpuruṣa), please pure down a rain like this on all the buddha-fields (buddhakṣet
ra) immediately.”Then, by the power of the Buddha (buddhānubhāva) and the magical presence of the bodhisatva Gaganagañja
, the whole assembly saw the rain of jewels (ratnavarṣa) and the rain of the dharma (dharmavarṣa) pouring down on those 
buddha-fields.By this miracle (prātihārya), the rain of jewels (ratnavarṣa) and the rain of the dharma (dharmavarṣa), pe
rformed by the bodhisatva Gaganagañja, immeasurable beings (gaṇanāsamatikrāntasatva) produced the thought of awakening (
samyaksaṃbodhau cittāny utpāditāni).

NirmitapuruṣaThen five hundred widows, having departed from the city of Rājagṛha and proceeded to the place where the bod
hisatva Gaganagañja stayed, said this to him:“If you fulfill the wishes of all living beings, O Good man (satpuruṣa), pl
ease return our husbands.”Immediately after that, by the magical presence of the bodhisatva Gaganagañja, five hundred me
n resembling their deceased husbands in colors, distinguishing marks, and appearances (varṇanimittasaṃsthāna), having de
scended from the open space (gaganād avatīrya), settled down in front of the bodhisatva Gaganagañja.Then the bodhisatva 
Gaganagañja said this to the women:“Sisters (bhaginī), bring your respective husbands just as they were (yathābhūta).”Th
en the women, having brought their respective husbands, being filled with rejoicing and happiness of mind, returned to t
heir respective homes.After that, by those magically created beings (nirmitāḥ puruṣāḥ), during seven days (saptāha), the
women were brought to maturity, in the way that they attained the stage of not falling back (avaivartika) from the supr
eme and perfect awakening (anuttarasamyaksaṃbodhi).Then the five hundred widows, having come to the bodhisatva Gaganagañ
ja, uttered these verses:

