Through these ten immeasurables (daśāpramāṇa), son of good family, the bodhisatva completes (paripūrayati) the accumulati
ons of merit (puṇyasaṃbhāra). What are these ten (katame daśa)?a) completion (paripūraṇā) of the immeasurable ornaments 
for the body (kāyālaṃkāra) by fulfilling the characteristics of a great man and the marks of beauty (lakṣaṇānuvyañjanapa
ripūraṇa);b) completion of the immeasurable ornaments of speech (vāgālaṃkāra) by purifying his sphere of speech (svarama
ṇḍala) so it is in accordance with all beings (sarvasatvānugatasvaramaṇḍalaviśuddhi);c) completion of the immeasurable o
rnaments for thought (cittālaṃkāra) in accordance with the thought of all beings (sarvasatvacittānuvartanatā);d) complet
ion of the immeasurable maturation (pariṇāmanā) of living beings through immeasurable behaviour (īryāpatha) of practice 
and knowledge;e) completion of the immeasurable purity of Buddha-fields (buddhakṣetra) through immeasurable forms (ākāra
);f) completion of the immeasurable behaviour of the Buddha (buddheryāpatha) by infinitely reflecting (nidhyāna) and pon
dering on the thought of merits;g) completion of the immeasurable embellishment of the place of awakening (bodhimaṇḍālaṃ
kāra) through all practices (sarvacaryā) with all arrangements of the ornaments (sarvālaṃkāravyūha);h) completion of the
immeasurable enjoyment (paribhoga) of the circle of hair between the eyebrows (ūrṇa) by accumulating endless offerings 
(anantayajña);i) completion of the immeasurable, invisible crown of the head (anavalokitamūrdha) by serving teachers (gu
ru) with endless homage and conquering pride (nihatamāna);j) completion of the immeasurable unfailing courage (amoghavik
rānti) by adequately grasping (pradakṣiṇagraha) the coming and going (āgatigati) without deception or guile (māyāśāṭhya)
;Through those ten immeasurables (daśāpramāṇa), son of good family, the bodhisatva accumulates the collection of merit (
puṇyasaṃbhāra).Furthermore, son of good family, when the thought of the bodhisatva becomes like open space, all his unde
rtakings (sarvārambha) are infinitely established everywhere since open space is infinite, and thus it is called merit l
ike open space (gaganasamapuṇya).

8. Jñāna

Son of good family, how does the knowledge of the bodhisatva becomes like open space (kathaṃ kulaputra bodhisatvasya jñān
aṃ gaganasamam)?Having pervaded the thoughts of all beings (sarvasatvacitta) by knowledge (jñāna), he knows the impassio
ned thought of all beings truly as it is, as an impassioned thought (sarvasatvacittaṃ sarāgaṃ cittam api sarāgaṃ cittaṃ 
yathābhūtaṃ prajānāti);he knows the thought full of aversion truly as it is, as a thought full of aversion (sadoṣaṃ citt
am api sadoṣaṃ cittaṃ yathābhūtaṃ prajānāti);he knows the thought full of bewilderment truly as it is, as a thought full
of bewilderment (samohaṃ cittam api samohaṃ cittaṃ yathābhūtaṃ prajānāti);he knows the thought full of impurity truly a
s it is, as a thought full of impurity (sopakleśaṃ cittaṃ api sopakleśaṃ cittaṃ yathābhūtaṃ prajānāti);he never deviates
from (avicalita) the nature of all moments of existence (dharmāprakṛti) which is without desire (rāga), and teaches rel
igion for other beings (parasatvapudgala) so that they overcome their desire;he never deviates from the nature of all mo
ments of existence which is without aversion (dveṣa), and teaches religion for other beings so that they overcome their 
aversion;he never deviates from the nature of all moments of existence which is without bewilderment (moha), and teaches
religion for other beings so that they overcome their bewilderment;he never deviates from the nature of all moments of 
existence which is without impurity (upakleśa), and teaches religion for other beings so that they overcome their impuri
ty;he teaches religion in order to purify the vices of desire, aversion, and bewilderment (rāgadveṣamohakleśa);he never 
looks down on the thought of desire, aversion, bewilderment, and impurity (rāgadveṣamohopakleśa); and he also never look
s up to the thought free from desire, aversion, bewilderment, and impurity.Why is that? Because bodhisatva understands t
he sphere of all moments of existence (dharmadhātu) from the viewpoint of non-duality (advaya), in the way that the sphe
re of all moments of existence is the same as the sphere of desire (rāgadhātu); the sphere of all moments of existence i
s the sphere of aversion (dveṣadhātu); the sphere of all moments of existence is the sphere of bewilderment (mohadhātu);
the sphere of all moments of existence is the sphere of vices (kleśadhātu).For that reason, since all moments of existe
nce are called the gathering of the sphere of all moments of existence (dharmadhātusamavasaraṇa), there is no going or n
o not-going in the sphere of all moments of existence;and since all moments of existence belong to the sphere of all mom
ents of existence (dharmadhātvanugata), he who knows the sphere of self (ātmadhātu) also knows the sphere of all moments
of existence.Thus the sphere of all moments of existence and the sphere of self are not two (advaya).Why is that? Becau
se the self is pure (ātmaviśuddhi), the sphere of all moments of existence is also pure (dharmadhātuviśuddhi).In that wa
y all moments of existence are pure, and this purity is illumination;the illumination is without any upper cover (ābhyav
akāśika);where there is no upper cover (ābhyavakāśika), there is no space (avakāśa) for any distinguishing marks (nimitt
a);where there are no distinguishing marks (animitta) there is no basis at all, and being without any basis is the same 
as open space.In that way he is in accordance with knowledge, and because of the knowledge, he is also in accordance wit
h all moments of existence. That is the knowledge of the bodhisatva becoming like open space.

9. BuddhānusmṛtiWhat then, son of good family, is the recollection of the Buddha, which is authorized by the Lord for bod
hisatvas? (tatra katamā kulaputra bodhisatvasya buddhānujñātā buddhānusmṛtiḥ).a) while recollecting the Buddha from the 
perspective of morality (śīla), he never gives up (asaṃpramoṣata) unsullied morality (anāsravaśīla);b) while recollectin
g the Buddha in the perspective concentration (samādhi), he is changeless (nirvikāra) concerning the sphere of the momen
ts of existence (dharmadhātu) being always same;c) while recollecting the Buddha from the perspective of insight (prajñā
), he is free from thought-constructions (nirvikalpa) since there is no activity in all moments of existence (sarvadharm
āpracāra);d) while recollecting the Buddha from the perspective of liberation (vimukti), he does not stay in the seconda
ry-thought (dvitīyacitta);e) while recollection the Buddha from the perspective of the vision of the knowledge of libera
tion (vimuktijñānadarśana), he is not attached (asakta) to any knowledge (sarvajñāna);f) while recollecting the Buddha f
rom the perspective of power (bala), he is not moving (āniñjya) concerning the knowledge which is equanimous in all thre
e times (tryadhvasamata);g) while recollecting the Buddha from the perspective of fearlessness (vaiśāradya), he does not
stay with any defilement (sarvāsravaḥ sārdhaṃ na saṃvasati);h) while recollecting the Buddha from the perspective of al
l qualities of the Buddha (sarvabuddhadharma), he does not have any false discrimination in the sameness of the sphere o
f all moments of existence (dharmadhātusamatāṃ na vikalpayati).Furthermore, the recollection of the Buddha is not to see
(na samanupaśyati) the Lord from his material body (rūpasvabhāva), but to be in accordance with the knowledge of recoll
ection through understanding the nature of the material form;it is not to see the Lord from his feeling, perception, for
mative factors or consciousness (vedanāsaṃjñāsaṃskāravijñāna), but to be in accordance with the knowledge of recollectio
n through understanding their nature;it is not to see the Lord from his parts of personality, spheres or fields of perce
ption (skandhadhātvāyatana), but to be in accordance with the knowledge of recollection through understanding their natu
re.Again, since he understands the essence of all moments of existence (sarvadharmasvabhāvajñānena), the recollection of
the great insight (mahāprajñānusmṛti) is beyond any mental effort (sarvamanasikāra) and the arising (paryuttāna) of any
viewpoint (sarvadṛṣṭi);Since in this way recollection is pure (anāvila), the knowledge of the application of awareness 
(smṛtyupsthānajñāna) is called the recollection of the Buddha which is taught by the Lord.Further, the recollection of t
he Buddha is not to be attached to any of the Lord’s ways of behavior (sarveryapatha), to wit: standing (sthita), walkin
g (caṃkrama), sitting (niṣadya), sleeping (śayana), going (gati), coming (āgati), speaking (pravyāhāra), and not speakin
g (apravyāhāra).Since there is no attachment, he does not recollect recollection nor recollect non-recollection.Since th
ere is no mental effort in recollection (asmṛtimanasikāra), he does not recollect the Buddha in the perspective of form,
distinguishing marks or any state of things (rūpalakṣaṇadharmatā).There is no involvement with any distinguishing mark 
or object (sarvanimittālambanāsamudācāra), son of good family, this is therefore the recollection of the Buddha, which i
s authorized by the Lord.

10. DharmānusmṛtiWhat then, son of good family, is the recollection of the Dharma, which is authorized by the Lord for th
e sake of the bodhisatvas (tatra katamā kulaputra bodhisatvānām buddhānujñātā buddhānusmṛtiḥ)?.The Dharma is without att
achment (arāga),and he who is attached to any dharma is without the recollection of the Dharma.The Dharma is without bas
is (anālaya),and where there is no the practice of the Dharma, there is no the recollection of the Dharma.The Dharma is 
calm (upaśānta), and he whose thought and mind are burning (jvalana) is without the recollection of the Dharma.The Dharm
a is beyond distinguishing marks (animitta), and he who pursues distinguishing marks (nimittānusāra) is without the reco
llection of the Dharma.The Dharma is unconditioned (asaṃskṛta), and he who is dependent on the conditioned place (saṃskṛ
tapratiṣṭhāpanapratiṣṭhita) is without the recollection of the Dharma.Further, the recollection of the Dharma is to see 
the fact that there is no origination of any conditioned thing (sarvasaṃskārānutpādadarśana), and to enter into faultles
s reality (samyaktvaniyamapraveśa).The bodhisatva, knowing that all dharmas are not originated because of their intrinsi
c nature (sarvadharmāṃ svabhāvānutpattiṃ viditvā), attains the tolerance that all things are unborn (anutpattikadharmakṣ
āntipratilabdha).This state of being is the true Dharma (bhūtadharma).He who understands thus understands all dharmas, s
ince it is the way in which the people on the path of training or on the path beyond training, the isolated buddhas, the
bodhisatvas, and the perfectly awakened one (śaikṣāśaikṣapratyekabuddhabodhisatvasamyaksaṃbuddha) understand all dharma
s.Such concentration (samāhita) is the liberation of all the holy (sarvāryavimukti), and in that there is no involvement
with any dharma (sarvadharmāsamudācāra).The absence of involvement with any dharma is the recollection of the Dharma, w
hich is authorized by the Lord (buddhānujñāta).

10. SaṃghānusmṛtiWhat then, son of good family, is the recollection on the Saṃgha, which is authorized by the Lord for th
e sake of the bodhisatvas (tatra katamā kulaputra bodhisatvasya saṃghānujñātā buddhānusmṛtiḥ)?.What we called the Saṃgha
is unconditioned (asaṃskṛta), and it cannot to be recollected in the perspective of conditioning (abhisaṃskāra).Where t
here is no involvement (samudācāra) with the actions of body, speech or mind (kāyavāṅmanaskarma), it is called unconditi
oned (anabhisaṃskāra).Thus what we called conditioned (saṃskṛta) is a mere denomination (prajñapti) and convention (vyav
ahāra);The unconditioned (asaṃskṛta) is the destruction of all denominations (sarvaprajñaptisamudghāta), and the transce
ndence of all conventions (sarvavyavahārasamatikrānta).Son of good family, this is the recollection of the congregation,
which is authorized by the Lord.

11. TyāgānusmṛtiWhat then, son of good family, is the recollection of renunciation, which is authorized by the Lord for t
he sake of the bodhisatvas? (tatra katamā kulaputra bodhisatvasya buddhānujñātā tyāgānusmṛtiḥ)What we called renunciatio
n (tyāga) is to abandon and renounce any material thing (sarvopadhi).Why is that? There is not any dharma that is to be 
renounced,and any dharma to be renounced does not appear.That which is not to be entangled in any dharma (sarvadharmāgra
haṇa) is the highest renunciation;that which is not entangled is without renunciation;that which is without renunciation
is without haughtiness (amanyanatā);that which is without haughtiness is without apprehending (anupalambha);that which 
is without apprehending is without [mental] activity (apracāra);that which is without [mental] activity is without infor
mation by thinking (cittāvijñapti);where there is no information by thinking (cittāvijñāpti), there is no basis in consc
iousness (vijñānāniśraya);that which is without basis in consciousness is the recollection of renunciation (tyāgānusmṛti
) authorized by the Lord.This renunciation of the bodhisatva is to transform into omniscience (sarvajñapariṇāmana), and 
the omniscience is the same as all moments of existence (sarvadharmasamatā).Even though staying in sameness (samatāsthit
a) he recollects renunciation; even though he does not recollect any moment of existence, he transforms into awakening (
bodhi).Why is that?Since in omniscience (sarvajñatā) there is no duality of truth and untruth (dharmādharma), the non-du
ality (advaya) is without any mental effort (manasikāra).In this way, son of good family, the bodhisatva cultivating the
knowledge of the Dharma (dharmajñānaprayukta) practices the recollection of renunciation which is authorized by the Lor
d.

12. ŚīlānusmṛtiSon of good family, how does the recollection of morality of bodhisatva becomes like open space (tatra kat
haṃ kulaputra bodhisatvasya buddhānujñātā śīlānusmṛtir gaganasamā)?.What we called ‘morality (śīla)’ is unconditioned (a
saṃskṛta), unsullied (anāsrava), no wishful thinking (apraṇidhāna), effortless (anābhoga), and it accomplishes vows (sid
dhavrata), fulfils the vows (vrataparipūri), and does not have essential characteristic of information (vijñaptilakṣaṇa)
.Since it is established by concentration (samādhi), it is not established in the object of thought (cittopalaṃbha).Sinc
e it is the root of insight (prajñāmūla), it is without essential characteristic of discursive thinking (niḥprapañcalakṣ
aṇa).Since it is the outcome of liberation (vimuktiniṣyanda), it is not distinguished by duality (advayaprabhāvita).Sinc
e there is no visual form, it is praised by the wise (pāṇḍitapraśaṃsita).Since it appeases vices (kleśapraśamana), there
is no essential characteristic of recognition (aprativijñaptilakṣaṇa).Since it is in accordance with all happiness (sar
vasukhānugata) and is not generated by the contrary (pratipakṣaprabhāvita), while recollecting this morality, there is n
o impurity (anāvila) in the recollection. Son of good family, this is what is called the recollection of morality which 
is authorized by the Lord (sa kulaputra bodhisatvasya buddhānujñātā śīlānusmṛtiḥ).

12. DevānusmṛtiWhat then, son of good family, is the recollection of gods, which is authorized by the Lord for bodhisatva
s (tatra katamā kulaputra bodhisatvasya buddhānujñātā devānusmṛtiḥ)?.It is the recollection of two assemblies of gods (d
evanikāya). What are these two (katame dve)?The gods of the Pure Abode (śuddhāvāsadeva), and the bodhisatvas hindered by
only one birth (ekajātipratibaddhabodhisatva), who dwell in the Tuṣita Heaven (tuṣitabhavanastha).In that the bodhisatv
a recollects the gods of the Pure Abode (śuddhāvāsadeva).Further, the bodhisatvas who are hindered by only one birth (ek
ajātipratibaddhabodhisatva), and who dwell in the Tuṣita Heaven (tuṣitabhavanastha) recollect ten qualities as the summi
t (mūrdhan). What are those ten qualities?

