What then, the son of good family, is memory (tatra katamā kulaputra dhāraṇī)?It is never forgetting the dharmas (dharmās
aṃpramoṣa) altogether;not forgetting the dharmas as he heard (yathāśrutadharmāsaṃpramoṣa);recollecting memory (smṛtim an
usmṛtiḥ);understanding the meaning (gatiṃ gataḥ);desiring intelligence (matikāmatā);non-extinction of a syllable (akṣayā
kṣaratā);knowledge of understanding explanations and vocal sounds (niruktiśabda_praveśajñāna);uninterrupted eloquence an
d unhindered teaching (apratihatanirdeśānācchedyapratibhāna);knowledge of the entrance into understanding the scripture 
of explicit meaning (nītārthasūtraprativedhapraveśajñāna);knowledge of the entrance into understanding the scripture of 
implicit meaning (neyārthasūtraprativedhapraveśajñāna);knowledge of the teaching on the imperishable concealed truth (ak
ṣayasaṃvṛtinirdeśajñāna);knowledge of the teaching on the highest truth which is inseparable from reality (avinirbhāgata
tvaparamārthanirdeśajñāna);knowledge on the certain entrance into the truth (satyāvatāraniyāmajñāna);knowledge in accord
ance with the application of awareness (smṛtyupasthānānuvartanajñāna);knowledge of the vigour without retrogression for 
correct elimination (samyakprahāṇavīryāsaṃkucitajñāna);knowledge on the miraculous plays by the bases of supernatural po
wer (ṛddhipādavikrīḍitajñāna);knowledge of the diversity of their abilities (indriyavaimātratā);unshakable knowledge whi
ch is established in power (balasthitācālanajñāna);penetrating the [seven] limbs of awakening (bodhyaṅgaprativedha);know
ledge without contradiction (anulomajñāna);knowledge of the basis that is the entering into the [noble eightfold] path (
mārgāvatārasthitijñāna);knowledge of the stillness of thought by peaceful meditation (śamathacittasthitijñāna);knowledge
of the dharma of liberation when concerned with expanded vision (vipaśyanadharmottaraṇajñāna);knowledge of the results 
of wisdom and liberation (vidyāvimuktiniṣyandajñāna);knowledge of special knowledge (pratisaṃvitpraveśajñāna);knowledge 
producing the supernormal knowledges (abhijñājñānotpādajñāna);knowledge of entering the six perfections (ṣaṭpāramitā_pra
veśajñāna);knowledge of the four means of attraction, according to deserts (catuḥsaṃgrahavastuyathāpratyarhajñāna);knowl
edge of entering the path of sound and voice (śabdavacanapathapraveśajñāna);knowledge of teaching the dharmas as convent
ional expressions (saṃketadharmanirdeśajñāna);non-discriminating knowledge of the meaning (arthāvinirbhāgajñāna);imperis
hable knowledge of the letter (vyañjanākṣayajñāna);knowledge of comforting all living beings (sarvasatvasaṃtoṣaṇajñāna);
knowledge of teaching the dharma appropriately to each and every one (yathāpratyarhadharmanirdeśajñāna);knowledge of kee
ping the words of all Buddhas by recollection (sarvabuddhabhāṣitasmṛtigrahaṇajñāna);knowledge of entering into analyzing
the syntax of all words and letters (sarvapadavyañjanānusaṃdhiniruktyavatārajñāna);knowledge understanding afflictions 
and purifications truly as they are (saṃkleśavyavadānayathābhūtāvabodhajñāna);knowledge understanding cause and action (
hetukriyā_praveśajñāna);knowledge of the manifestation of all dharmas, free from blindness (sarvadharmāvabhāsavitimirajñ
āna);This is called memory (eyaṃ dhāraṇīti).When his body, speech, and mind (kāyavākcitta) are included (saṃgrhita) in a
state which is like the earth (dharaṇi), such are imperishable,the rain of the dharma (dharmavarṣa) falls, pacifies the
burning pains of vices (kleśasaṃtāpa), and makes all qualities of the Buddha (sarvabuddhadharma) grow. This is way of e
ntering the way of memory,He who has attained memory (dhāraṇīpratilabdha) knows the practice that is never forgetting an
y dharma of the Buddha.In this way, son of good family, the bodhisatva who has attained memory practices not forgetting.

29. PratibhānaHow then, son of good family, is the bodhisatva supported by the presence of the buddha as unhindered and u
ninterrupted eloquence (tatra katamā kulaputra bodhisatvasyāpratihatānācchedyapratibhāne nityabuddhādhiṣṭhānādhiṣṭhitaḥ)
?

