233 Even though the bodhisatva sees immeasurably extensive fields in ten directions by the eye of the buddha (buddhalocan
ā), fills all those places with jewels, and gives them as a gift, if there is someone who retains, reads and teaches suc
h excellent and unsullied sūtra which has been taught by many buddhas, then his merit would be better.234 Even though th
e bodhisatva fills all those fields with flowers (puṣpa), fragrances (sugandha), ointments (vilepana), parasols (chattra
), flags (patākā), banners (dhvaja) and wreath s of cloth, and makes an offering to the buddhas, if there is someone tak
ing care of the true dharma (saddharma) to be grasped at the time of the disintegration and cessation of the dharma of t
he Well-gone One (sugata), then his merit would be better.235 Even though the bodhisatva places a lamp (pradīpa) on shri
nes (caitya) dedicated to the Victorious One (jina), which is filled with perfumed oil like the ocean (sāgara) in ten di
rections and made of a wick (varti) like the Mt. Sumeru, if there is someone who, having known that the whole world is c
overed by darkness (andhakāra), upholds this dharma taught by the Victorious One when the lamp of the dharma (dharmaprad
īpa) is extinguished, then his merit would be better.236 Even though the bodhisatva, seeking the highest awakening (agra
bodhi) of the buddha, seeing the leaders (nāyaka) in ten millions of fields, has offered beautiful [clothes] made of sil
k for many millions of aeons, if there is someone who, giving thanks to the buddha, upholding (anugraha) the three jewel
s (triratna), grasps the true dharma (saddharma) to be apprehended by living beings, then his merit would be better.237 
In the same way that I grasp the dharma of the protectors (nātha), I see living beings by the eye of the buddha (buddhal
ocanā) and teach them to be Śakras or Brahmās, but it does not increase merit that much. Even though I teach all those b
eings to be the worthy ones (arhat) or to mount on the vehicle of the isolated buddha (pratyekayāna), if there is someon
e who, having generated the thought of awakening (bodhicitta), upholds the true dharma (saddharma), then it would be bet
ter (viśiṣṭa).238 If his merit has a material form, all the fields in ten direction would be filled up with it, and ther
e would be no vessel [to contain that merit] except for the the knowledge of the best of men (puruṣarṣabhajñāna). Just a
s, even if one expresses the knowledge of the buddha (buddhajñāna) for ten thousand aeons, there will be no end, just so
it is impossible to measure the merit of upholding the true dharma of the tathāgata.

Then the bodhisatva Puṇyālaṃkāra, having heard this teaching on the merit of upholding the true dharma from the Lord, bec
ame contented, elated, enraptured, overjoyed, exultant and jubilant (tuṣṭodagrāttamanāḥ pramuditaḥ prītisaumanasyajāto b
havati), and addressed himself to the Lord:“O Lord, the bodhisatvas, who do not strive for upholding the true dharma, wi
ll be beset by the Māra (mārādhiṣṭhita).If, O Lord, there are bodhisatvas who [have planted] all other roots of good wit
hout upholding the true dharma, their merits would be merely as a mustard seed (sarṣapa).The roots of good stemming from
upholding the true dharma are established in the conception of a self (ātmasaṃjñā), which is exactly the same as the sp
here of space (gaganadhātu) in ten directions.In order to seek for the happiness of all living beings (sarvasatvasukha),
O Lord, I will give up my body and soul (kāyajīvita), and, without desiring any happiness for me, will put on the armou
r for the sake of upholding the true dharma.”When this exposition of religion was set forth, due to the maturation of th
e bodhisatva Gaganagañja’s merit, in order to pay homage (pūjākarmaṇa) to this exposition of religion (dharmaparyāya), t
he bodhisatvas, who have the same thoughts with the bodhisatva Gaganagañja, dwelling in immeasurable buddha-fields in te
n directions, poured down the rain of flowers (puṣpavarṣa) from the vault of the sky.Then this sound resonated in open s
pace: “While adorning and upholding this chapter of the Great Collection (mahāsaṃnipātaparivarta), the bodhisatva, the g
reat being Gaganagañja has done the buddha-activities (buddhakārya).The living beings who are not separated from the tho
ught of awakening (bodhicittāviyukta) will uphold this exposition of religion, and in the same way, they will adorn the 
true dharma.”Then at that time, the Lord emitted such light from his body, thereby all buddha-fileds in ten directions b
ecame filled with it.When the beginning, middle and end of this exposition of religion was set forth, immeasurable, inca
lculable living beings produced the thought of awakening, and attained the tolerance [that all things are unborn (anutpa
ttikadharmakṣānti).]Some of their thoughts were liberated, some of them attained the eyes of the dharma (dharmacakṣuḥ), 
some of them became free from desire, some of them acquired the good qualities of gods and men (devamanuṣyasaṃpatti) and
gathered causes for seeing other buddhas, and even the Lord was pleased with all of them.As the Lord had uttered these 
words, the bodhisatva great being Gaganagañja, the bodhisatva great being Maitreya, the bodhisatva great being Kutūhalaj
āta, the bodhisatva great being Ratnapāṇi, the bodhisatva great being Mañjuśrī, the bodhisatva great being Guṇarājaprabh
āsa, the bodhisatva great being Puṇyālaṃkāra, the bodhisatva great being Apāyajaha, the bodhisatva great being Dharmarāj
a, the venerable Śāriputra, the venerable Mahākāśyapa, the venerable Ānanda, the Brahmā king of Sahā, Śakra king of the 
gods, the Four Great Kings, the monks, the bodhisatvas, the whole of that assembly, and the world with its gods, human b
eings, anti-gods and gandharvas praised what the Lord had preached (idam avocad bhagavān āttamanā gaganagañjo bodhisatvo
mahāsatvaḥ ca maitreyo bodhisatvo mahāsatvaś ca kutūhalajāto bodhisatvo mahāsatvaś ca ratnapāṇir bodhisatvo mahāsatvaś 
ca mañjuśrīr bodhisatvo mahāsatvaś ca guṇarājaprabhāso bodhisatvo mahāsatvaś ca puṇyālaṃkāro bodhisatvo mahāsatvaś ca ap
āyajaho bodhisatvo mahāsatvaś ca dharmarājo bodhisatvo mahāsatvaś ca śāriputraḥ āyuṣmāṃś ca mahākāśyapaḥ āyuṣmāṃś ca āna
ndaḥ āyuṣmāṃś ca brahmā sahāṃpatiś ca śakraś ca devānām indraś catvāraś ca mahārājānaḥ te ca bhikṣavaḥ te ca mahāśrāvakā
ś sā ca sarvāvatī parṣat sadevamānuṣāsuragandharvaś ca loko bhagavato bhāṣitam abhyanandann iti).

Colophon

The Exalted Discourse of the Great Vehicle entitled The Questions of Gaganagañja is completed (mahāsaṃnipātād āryagaganag
añjaparipṛcchā nāma mahāyānasūtraṃ samāptam).Translated, rendered into the new terminology, and finalized by the Indian 
preceptor Vijayaśīla, Śīlendrabodhi, and the chief editor-cum-translator, Ye shes sde.

