1 He who excels in religious teachings and its purpose (dharmārtha), qualities (guṇa), and knowledge (jñāna), who is comp
lete pure, impeccable, pure from his origin, and stainless, who is placed anywhere (apratiṣṭhita) like space (gaganasama
) and unmoving (aniñjya), who is of extreme depth (gambhīra) and beyond any range (agocara), I bow to him.

2 Victorious One (jīna) whose absolute body (dharmakāya) is same as the manifested (prabhāvita) body, displayed the hands
ome (abhirūpa) body as endowed with the beautiful form (surūpa), having produced (prajanita) the compassion (karuṇā) whi
ch brings benefits for living beings (satvānugrāhaka), reveals the supreme body which has the characters of hundredfold 
merits (śatapuṇyalakṣaṇāni).

3 You never say erroneous (nirvikalpa) words and sentences (śabdavacana). Having known the essential character of sentenc
e cannot be grasped because it is like an echo, also having known [the essential character of] words and letters (akṣara
) cannot be grasped because they are not eternal (anitya), Loving One, you speak the teaching of the Victorious One by g
reat compassion.

4 You understand (adhigama) the thought and the contents of thought (cittacaitta) of all living beings (sarvasatva), know
the essential character of mind (citta) and the stream of thought (cittadhārā) which are like an illusion (māyā), and y
our mind is not dependent on thought, mind, and consciousness (cittamanovijñāna)

5 When you teach your practice (caryā) to living beings (jagat), there is no change in the body of the Sugata.But still, 
you teach in a manner in accordance with the power of retaining [in memory], the thinking, the qualities, characteristic
s and behavior (īryāpatha) [of you listeners].

6 [Because] the concept of mine (mamakāra) does not exist in the dharma of the Sugata, you neither depend (āśrita) nor ho
ld (agrāha) on the dharma.But having known the discipline (vinaya) for all kinds of beings through conceptions (saṃkalpa
) of the dharma, you always teach the peerless (annutara) dharma.

7 When the whole assembly regard the body of the Victorious One, his form and distinguishing marks (rūpanimitta) appear a
s different (bhinna), though incomparable (atulya), and even not part of any particular group (asabhāga).And even though
his body is changeless (nirvikāra), beyond thought-constructions (nirvikalpa), and without distinguishing marks (animit
ta), he gladdens the assemblies in accordance with their particular way of thinking and their intentions (yathācittāśaya
).

8 These all dharmas, having been born from causes and conditions (hetupratyaya), produced by thought-constructions (saṃka
lpa) are not produced (asaṃskāra), without an intrinsic nature (asvabhāva).Still the Sugata, having known the mode (naya
) of such dharmas, obtained the changeless (nirvikāra), peaceful (śānta), unsurpassable (anuttara) enlightenment.

9 Without discrimination (vikalpa) eliminating the middle (madhya) and the extremes (anta), [you understand] emptiness, t
hat all has a trifling instrinsic nature (riktasvabhāva), is worthless (tuccha) and void (vaśika).Though, knowing the co
mplete purity (viśuddhi) of such dharmas, you explain cause (hetu) and action (karma) to living beings.

10 The dharmas are devoid of a living being (satva), a life principle (jīva), and a person (pudgala). They are pure and b
eyond words (nāma) like the sameness of space (gaganasamasamatā).Understanding the fact that there is no real self, he a
wakens living beings to the unconditioned (asaṃskṛta) ambrosia (amṛta).

11 You have practised in order to seek awakening (bodhi) by the power and effort of vigour (vīryabala) during inconceivab
le (acintiya) hundred koṭis of kalpas (kalpakoṭīśata).But you still attained awakening charecterized by practice without
effort, and that is how you have obtained the aim (artha) of practice.

12 Because of the wisdom of concentration (samādhi) on the sameness of dharmas (sarvadharmasamatā), you know the sameness
of the superior, average or inferior [disciples] (hīnotkṛṣṭamadhyamasamatā, cf. Laṅk).But staying with sameness (samatā
) you do not construct (na vikḷp-) [a concept of] sameness, the Victorious One (jīna) is concentrated (samāhita) without
change (nirvikāra).

13 The parts of the personality, spheres and fields of perception (skandhadhātvāyatana) are as an illusion (māyopama); th
e three worlds are as the reflection of the moon in the water (udakacandropama) without change (acyuta); all living bein
gs are non-existence (abhāva) as a dream (svapnopama). Having realized the fact that all things are like a dream by the 
knowledge, you teach this dharma.

14 According to what is essentially a conventional expression (vyavahārasvabhāva) you attained the supreme enlightenment 
(agrabodhi), but, really, that is ineffable (anudāhāra) since there is neither attainment nor non-attainment (prāptāprāp
ta).You obtain the dharma wheel as you attain awakening, but the turning is really without any distinguishing mark, and 
as such the enterance into neither turning nor non-turning.

15 Having crossed over to the other side (uttīrya), you save (uttaraṇa) an inconceivable number of living beings (bahusat
va); having been released yourself (muktvā), you completely release (vimocayasi) those still in bondage (bandhana);you c
are for the living beings of the world (jagat) in this incomparable (anuttara) great vehicle (mahāyāna), you place them 
in extinction (nirvāṇam pratiṣṭhāpayati), which is the sameness of being beyond any way (nairyāṇa)

16 Even though living beings nowhere and never exist, as does not extinction (nirvāṇa), even though there is nothing for 
living beings to achieve since they are originally pure (ādiviśuddhi),the Buddha still awakens (avabodhayati) koṭis of l
iving beings (bahusatva), having himself become awakened to the understanding that living beings have the character of a
n illusion (māyā).

17 No forms are seen in empty space, the forms of every living being are also like that.The moments of existence have the
essential character of a form being neither form nor non-form (dharmā narūpārūparūpalakṣaṇāḥ), such it is to understand
things (artha) as complete transcendence (viveka).

18 [No matter] how much living beings praise (praśaṃsita) the Victorious One (jina) by means of examples (udāharaṇa), it 
is still an attachment (saṅga) that they see him with respect to the praising.Because the qualities (svaguṇa) of the Lea
der (nāyaka) are like empty space (gagamasama), the praising for non-duality (advaya) is to praise the Victorious One.

19 The Buddha who awakens (prabodhayati) living beings, transcends objectification (anālambana), and attains the nature o
f mind (cittatva) which is without mind, I pay homage to him.As all leaders (nāyaka) praise (praśaṃsanti) the Lion Among
Men (nṛsiṃha), in that way, I praise the true qualities (bhūtaguṇa) because of suchness (tathatā).

20 He knows all living beings have egolessness (nairātmya), the sphere of dharmas of the Omniscient (viśvabodhi) has the 
same character, and the character of all dharmas is free from desire (virāga). Because of that, the Leader (nāyaka) havi
ng sameness (samatā) is honored.

As soon as (samanantara) the bodhisatva, the great being Gaganagañja said these verses (śloka), the pavilions in the sky 
of the Mahāvyūha universe has been shaken (pracalita) in six ways (ṣaḍartha).Then a voice resounded from empty space (an
tarīkṣa), saying, “The bodhisatva, the great being Gaganagañja has praised in verses (gāthābhigīta) the complete unsurpa
ssable awakening (anuttarāsamyakṣaṃbodhi) which has been fully accomplished by the buddhas in uncountable hundreds, thou
sands, millions, billions of ages (asaṃkhyeyakalpakoṭīniyutaśatasahasrasamudānīta).But these bodhisatvas cannot see this
[awakening] as object (ālambana) even in their dreams (svapna) because of their attachment (abhiniveśa).Having heard, a
ttained and believed in this teaching of the dharma (dharmanaya), whosoever will gradually attain the lion’s roar (siṃha
nādanādi) like that of bodhisatva Gaganagañja.”Then the bodhisatva Gaganagañja, having praised the Lord with these verse
s, addressed himself to the Lord (atha gaganagañjo bodhisatvo gāthābhir abhiṣṭutya bhagavantam idam avocat):O Lord, I, h
aving heard the name of this exposition of religion, a chapter of the Great Collection (aham apy bhagavan mahāsaṃnipātap
arivartaṃ dharmaparyāyaṃ nāma śrutvā), arrived in this Sahā world system (lokadhātu), to see, honor, serve the Lord and 
to [listen] this exposition of religion (taṃ bhagavantaṃ darśanāya vandanāya paryupāsanāya dharmaśravaṇāya), and also I 
came here (ihāgata) to perform the light of dharma (dharmāloka).O Lord, please elucidate (saṃdeśayatu) this exposition o
f religion to these good men (satpuruṣa) who have a doubt (saṃśaya) in their respective religions (svakeṣu svakeṣu dharm
eṣu). May the Blessed Tathāgata please cut off their all doubts (sarvasaṃśaya) and illuminate all qualities of the Buddh
a (sarvabuddhadharma) since you are established (pratiṣṭhita) in the ascertainment (niścaya) in your mind (buddhi).

